If I give you a coin and ask you to determine the probability of it
landing on head for a single toss. What will you do？ A common way is to
flip the coin 20 times(or the amount you considered as enough) and count
how many times it comes up with head. Let’s assume it land on heads 15
out of 20 tosses. Then your answer will be the number of heads divided
by the number of tosses, which is 15/20. If you take this approach, you
view probability in a frequentist way. Frequentist probability is
defined as the relative frequency of an event occurs when the process
that generate the event is repeated multiple times(Ross, 2018, p. 2).
This is usually the definition when we first learned probability in
schools.

But do people really think about probability in a frequentist view in
their daily life? One limitation of this view is that it only assign
probability to random repeatable events. However, many things in our
life are not random or repeatable yet people still assign probability to
them. For example, you might have heard the expression similar to “I am
90% sure that the average height of girls in our class is …”. Even
though average height is unknown, but because it is fixed and not
random, Frequentist statistician can not assign probability to it. This
means that when we are using probability, we do not necessary see it as
a frequentist probability. Then what is the other interpretation of
probability?

Before answering that question, let’s go back to our coin flip example.
Here is another approach you might take. Before you toss the coin, you
asked me what do I know about this coin. Then I will tell you that it is
very likely to be a fair coin. Then will your answer still be 15/20 ?
Most likely you will provide an answer closer to 50% if you trust my
information because you know a fair coin will have 50% chance to land on
head. So even though when you toss the coin it does not land on head
half of the time, but because you now think it is likely to be a fair
coin, the probability of it landing on head should not be as high as
15/20.

This interpretation of probability is known as the Bayesian probability,
is a degree of personal belief of a event will happen(Ross, 2018,
p. 46). Unlike the frequentist probability derived by performing a large
number of experiments, Bayesian probability is calculated using
information that change people’s belief. So when you trust my
information about the fair coin, it changes your belief of the coin
lands on heads.

The mathematical way to present the Bayesian probability is shown in the
following picture.

![](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/d9/35/70/d3/4572/45fd/9b16/b7eee4f748b7/bayestheorem1png.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2&w=492)

In our coin flip example, your belief of the 50% probability due to my
information is called prior probability P(H), which is the probability
before you actually toss the coin. Here the result of your coin
tosses(15 heads in 20 tosses) is the evidence. Now given that
evidence(your toss result), you start to have doubts about the my claim
that it is very likely to be a fair coin. You start to wonder how
possible is it for a coin to land on head 15 out of 20 times if it is
indeed fair. This probability is what we called likelihood of evidence
when hypothesis or prior information is correct, which is P(E|H) in the
graph. Along with the likelihood of evidence to be true, you will get
your answer to my question which is the posterior probability, P(H|E).

The calculation for Bayesian probability might seem tedious and we are
not likely to go through the exact formula when we are thinking about
the probability of an event in our daily life. However, We do use a
simple version of Bayesian. For example, one morning when you are
deciding whether you should bring an umbrella when you leave your house.
You look at the gloomy sky, looks like it is going to rain. Then you
remember that it rained most of the time last week. That information
will likely to change your mind from “It might rain” to “It is very
likely to rain”. Here the memory from last week is a prior knowledge and
when you combine it with the gloomy sky, it changes your belief of
actual raining today.

So next time when you are talking about probability, why not pause and
think for a second which type of probability you are using?

Work cited:

Ross, S. (2018). First Course in Probability. Pearson Education Canada.
P2,46.

Source of picture:

<a href="https://fsmedia.imgix.net/d9/35/70/d3/4572/45fd/9b16/b7eee4f748b7/bayestheorem1png.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&amp;dpr=2&amp;w=492" class="uri">https://fsmedia.imgix.net/d9/35/70/d3/4572/45fd/9b16/b7eee4f748b7/bayestheorem1png.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&amp;dpr=2&amp;w=492</a>
